Data Incubator Project Proposal

Electroencephalography is an essential medical imaging tool used to
non-invasively examine the electrical activity of the brain. It is used
to aid in the diagnosis and routine monitoring of a number of common
neurological conditions, such as epilepsy and sleep disorders. Despite
its ubiquity, our understanding of EEG and how best to interpret EEG
recordings remains incomplete. Until recently, research designed to help
us better understand and make better use of EEG has, by necessity,
relied on classical statistics and relatively small sample sizes. This
is because individual samples of EEG are difficult to acquire, complex
to analyze, and large in size (a typical recording may be 20MB). On top
of this, EEG has very high variance, and is characterized by numerous
types of artifacts and noise, which means studies with small sample size
may be inconclusive, or produce false results. These types of problems
could be addressed with the techniques common to machine learning and
data science. There have been some concerted and notable efforts in this
regard, for example using EEG to help predict the onset of seizures, but
they are not yet widespread in the communtiy. Therefore, there exists an
opportunity for collaboration between neuroscientists and data
scientists, given that there exists a suitably robust dataset.

The Temple University Hospital EEG Corpus (TUHEEGC) is the largest
publically available EEG dataset in the world. As of 2016, it contained
572GB of data, representing over 250,000 channel-hours of recording,
spread over nearly 17,000 sessions, and has since grown. This includes
data collected from subjects of all ages, with a wide variety of medical
presentations, medications, and histories. Furthermore, the EEG is often
accompanied by supplemental sensor data, such as electrocardiographs or
electromyographs. Perhaps most interestingly, each recording is coupled
with a clinician's report, which is a small .txt file containing a few
short paragraphs describing the patient, and the clinician's findings.
Some files also have a more detailed second-by-second notation of the
recording. These notations allow for the possibility of using text
analysis to identify EEG features associated with aspects of the
subject's presentation.

Given the limitations of the hardware available to me, I have only been
to examine a portion of the dataset. In order to give an idea of the
sorts of topics that can be addressed using this dataset, I have parsed
the description files from a small fraction of the TUHEEGC (specifically
the Six-Way Event Classification Corpus v1.0.0 subset, containing ~300
recordings  and ~19GB of data) and created a word cloud (see figure 1).
For example, we can find medication names like Keppra, suggesting that
we could use this dataset to learn more about how drugs affect EEG
signals. We also find key words that relate to the patient's conditions,
like "seizures," "abnormal," "sleep," and "hyperventilation," as well as
words that describe the EEG waveform, like "theta," "rhythmic," and
"spike."

In order to explore the possibilities of event classification using the
dataset, I used the 6-way event labels provided in this subset of the
TUHEEGC to train a K-Nearest-Neighbors model to classify the labeled EEG
events into the following six categories: 'spike and slow wave',
'generalized periodic epileptiform discharge', 'periodic lateralized
epileptiform discharge', 'eye movement', 'artifact', and 'background.'
This dataset contains over 110,000 pre-labeled events. For each, I
calculated the power spectral density (PSD) of the corresponding EEG
segment. From these PSDs, I calculated the mean amplitudes of the 5
common EEG frequency bands (delta, theta, alpha, beta and gamma) and
used these as the features for the KNN classifier. Using this simple
approach, I was able to accuratley classify 59.9% of all events using
5-fold cross validation (See confusion matrix in Figure 2). With greater
computational power, we could test more complex approaches to this task,
and achieve greater performance. Detecting these types of events
automatically and accuratley would be a valuable tool both for
researchers and clinicians.

There are some obstacles to overcome in order to use this dataset. Given
that the recordings were collected over the course of many years, there
are differences in the specifications of each session. In particular,
they vary in duration, channel number, and sample frequency. Any
analysis of this data must either include only those samples with
particular specs, or develop a way of normalizing them. It is possible
to achieve this, with a well designed schema. You could, for example, up
or downsample to make the sampling rate congruent, discard channels not
present in all recordings, and use frequency-domain analytics which are
less sensitive to recording duration. There is also no consensus on what
features of an EEG recording are most pertinent to researchers, be it
the time domain or frequency domain, or the more complex relationship
between separate channels.

Ultimately, this is an under-explored dataset full of possibilities to
improve our use of an important medical diagnostic. I have already
demonstrated the feasibility of using the TUHEEGC, but there still
remains a great deal of work to be done.